Mnot/edits (#152)
ietf-wg-masque/draft-ietf-masque-h3-datagram: draft-ietf-masque-h3-datagram.md

    organization: "Cloudflare"
    email: lucaspardue.24.7@gmail.com

normative:
  QUIC: RFC9000
  H3: I-D.ietf-quic-http
  H2: I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2bis

--- abstract

This document describes HTTP Datagrams, a convention for conveying multiplexed,
potentially unreliable datagrams inside an HTTP connection.

In HTTP/3, HTTP Datagrams can be conveyed natively using the QUIC DATAGRAM
extension. To enable seamless transfer of HTTP Datagrams in other protocol
versions, this document also defines the Capsule Protocol, a more general

> convention for conveying data in HTTP connections.

Reviewer: The version limitations are not strictly true. We would probably be better phrasing things, here and elsewhere in the document, more like "where QUIC DATAGRAMS are unavailable or undesireable (e.g. other HTTP versions or specific use cases) the Capsule Protocol provides a general convention for conveying data in HTTP connections, which can be used for datagram messages.

Both are intended for use by HTTP extensions, not applications.

--- middle

# Introduction {#intro}

HTTP extensions sometimes need to access underlying transport protocol features
such as unreliable delivery (as offered by {{!DGRAM=I-D.ietf-quic-datagram}})

> to enable desirable features like an unreliable version of the CONNECT method,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to enable desirable features like an unreliable equivalent to the CONNECT method,
```

perhaps

and unreliable delivery in WebSockets {{?RFC6455}} (or its successors).

In {{datagrams}}, this document describes HTTP Datagrams, a convention for

> conveying multiplexed, bidirectional datagrams inside a HTTP connection. They

Reviewer: I'm not a huge fan of mixing terms like datagrams, streams, and streams of datagrams. That seems like a recipe for confusion and RFC editor purgatory.

> conveying multiplexed, bidirectional datagrams inside a HTTP connection. They

Reviewer 2: It is confusing… but I guess being vague about what HTTP datagrams are and how they relate to HTTP conversations does not ease that confusion.
Perhaps calling it "streams of datagrams" would make it a bit less confusing.

> conveying multiplexed, bidirectional datagrams inside a HTTP connection. They

Reviewer: datagrams are datagrams. They are associated with request streams. How zero, one or many datagrams might get used in either direction is entirely up to the thing that uses them. 

Perhaps this paragraph would be better phrased by starting it along the lines of 

"In {{datagrams}}, this document describes HTTP datagrams, a convention that associates non-content data with HTTP requests to support the bidirectional, possibly multiplexed, exchange of datagrams inside an HTTP connection."

are intended for use by HTTP extensions (such as the CONNECT method), and are
compatible with all versions of HTTP. When the underlying transport protocol
supports unreliable delivery (such as when the QUIC DATAGRAM extension is
available in HTTP/3), they use that capability.

It also describes the HTTP Capsule Protocol in {{capsule}}, to allow conveyance
of HTTP Datagrams over other versions of HTTP.

## Conventions and Definitions {#defs}

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# HTTP Datagrams {#datagrams}

HTTP Datagrams are a convention for conveying bidirectional and potentially
unreliable datagrams inside an HTTP connection, with multiplexing when
possible. All HTTP Datagrams are associated with an HTTP request.

When HTTP Datagrams are conveyed on a HTTP/3 connection, the QUIC DATAGRAM
frame is used to achieve these goals, including unreliable delivery; see
{{format}}. Negotiation is achieved using a SETTING; see {{setting}}.

When running over HTTP/2, demultiplexing is provided by the HTTP/2 framing
layer, but unreliable delivery is unavailable. HTTP Datagrams are negotiated
and conveyed using the Capsule Protocol; see {{datagram-capsule}}.

> When running over HTTP/1, requests are strictly serialized in the connection,
> and therefore demultiplexing is not available. Unreliable delivery is likewise
> not available. HTTP Datagrams are negotiated and conveyed using the Capsule
> Protocol; see {{datagram-capsule}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running over HTTP/1, upgrading the connection to convay HTTP datagrams prevents other uses of the connection and therefore (de-)multiplexing not possible. Unreliable delivery is likewise
not available. HTTP Datagrams are negotiated and conveyed using the Capsule
Protocol; see {{datagram-capsule}}.
```
Closes #156

Author: This PR is intended to be purely editorial, so let's keep resolution of that separate.

HTTP Datagram Payload:

: The payload of the datagram, whose semantics are defined by the

> application. Note that this field can be empty.

Reviewer: In the abstract, you propose the addition of the text "Both are intended for use by HTTP extensions, not applications." do you think we need to, similarly, avoid using the term application here?

Author: Possibly -- the semantics are definitely _contextualised_ by the extension in use, and it's probably up to it to determine whether they're delegated to the application.

how about

```suggestion
extension that is using HTTP Datagrams. Note that this field can be empty.
```

practical barriers to determining the active stream concurrency limit that is
applied by the QUIC layer.

> HTTP/3 datagrams MUST only be sent with an association to a stream whose HTTP
> semantics explicitly supports HTTP Datagrams. For example, existing HTTP

Author: This is still a bit imprecise. suggest

```suggestion
HTTP/3 datagrams MUST only be sent with an association to a stream whose HTTP
semantics explicitly supports HTTP Datagrams (usually, in conjunction with the extension that invokes
the use of HTTP Datagrams. For example, existing HTTP
```

Also, these requirements seem general to all HTTP datagrams, but are placed against "HTTP/3 datagrams"

endpoints negotiate the same draft version.

> ## The DATAGRAM Capsule {#datagram-capsule}

Reviewer 2: Closely match "HTTP/3 Datagrams" header
```suggestion
## HTTP/2 and HTTP/1.1 Datagrams using DATAGRAM Capsules {#datagram-capsule}
```

Reviewer: again, this implies a version restriction the doesn't exist

type MUST be handled as if the field were not present by recipients. This
document does not define any parameters for the Capsule-Protocol header
field value, but future documents might define parameters. Receivers MUST ignore
unknown parameters.

~~~ abnf
Capsule-Protocol = sf-item
~~~
Endpoints indicate that the Capsule Protocol is in use on a data stream by
sending a Capsule-Protocol header field with a true value. A Capsule-Protocol
header field with a false value has the same semantics as when the header is not
present.

Endpoints indicate that the Capsule Protocol is in use on the data stream by
sending the Capsule-Protocol header field with a value of ?1. A Capsule-Protocol
header field with a value of ?0 has the same semantics as when the header is not
present. Intermediaries MAY use this header field to allow processing of HTTP
Datagrams for unknown HTTP Upgrade Tokens; note that this is only possible for
HTTP Upgrade or Extended CONNECT.
Intermediaries MAY use this header field to allow processing of HTTP Datagrams
for unknown HTTP Upgrade Tokens; note that this is only possible for HTTP
Upgrade or Extended CONNECT.

> The Capsule-Protocol header field MUST NOT be sent multiple times on a message.

Reviewer: @mnot was there a reason to remove this multiplicity requirement? Can we track that as a separate issue?
